One of the most difficult bulls to call within bow range is a bull with cows.   Often we use the term herd bull.  A common occurrence when you pressure a herd bull is they will gather their cows and move off.  As long as you keep following and bugling at him, it’s unlikely you will close the gap.  I’ve tried several methods that work well in this kind of situation.

The first method of hunting herd bulls takes two people, a caller and a shooter.  When hunting herd bulls the caller wants to keep plenty of distance between him and the bull, allowing the shooter to sneak in silently on the bugling bull. It’s very rare to sneak all the way in for a shot. Try to get as close as possible.  If the bull quits answering the caller, it’s now time for the shooter to set up and begin calling.  Again, the closer the shooter is to the bull before he makes a call, the more likely the bull will respond.  Start with a basic low volume call such as a cow mew.  If no response, then bugle and grunt.  Be ready when a herd bull decides to come in.  It’s possible he will bugle as he’s walking.  If a bull comes in silently, there’s a good chance that it’s a satellite bull.  The term satellite bull often refers to the younger bulls that hang on the outside of the harem.

The second method is for a person hunting alone.  Calling a herd bull to within bow range can be very challenging.  I’ve been successful at harvesting several herd bulls while doing both the calling and shooting.  This is my favorite method.  In 2011, I was bow hunting for elk in Eastern Wyoming.  I had located a large 6x6 bull in a remote basin.  There were two other 6x6 satellite bulls who were challenging the herd bull for his cows, which made for an ideal calling scenario.  I entered the area on the morning of the 17th of September.  I bugled into the canyon.  At a distance, the herd bull answered my call.  I listened carefully and determined the direction the herd was going.  The bull continued bugling as he herded his cows up the ridge.  Not making a call, I followed the bull trying to close the gap.  After 45 minutes of hiking, I caught up to the bull in a pocket of timber.  The bull was aggressively bugling at another bull.  The wind currents were questionable in the canyon, so I set up in the rocks on the edge hoping to call the bull into a clearing below me.  I started with a series of cow mews and lost calf calls. Trying to direct my sound into the basin, I tossed a few rocks down the hill to imitate a cow elk running.  I then bugled.  I could see the large 6x6 bull walking back and forth in the timber.  He was obviously irritated with the other 6x6 bull.  He bugled and walked back into the timber.  With the questionable wind and not wanting to push the bull out of the area, I decided to back out and move up the ridge and wait for the afternoon hunt.  An hour later the bull and his harem moved out of the basin and into a pocket of dark timber where they bedded down.  I positioned myself above the herd and waited for the bull to get active.  Later that afternoon, I could hear the bull bugle below me.  I checked the wind and made a few cow mews with my Fatal Attraction Cow Call.  The bull answered immediately.  I listened carefully and determined the herd was moving down the mountain. I closed the distance and set up.  I made a few cow mews.  The bull answered.  Trying to imitate the sound of the bull, I bugled immediately.  The bull bugled aggressively, but was not getting any closer.  I moved down the mountain further.  I could see a few cow elk feeding in the aspen trees 50 yards in front of me.  I watched the cows for a few minutes and then made a low volume bugle.  The cows lifted their heads and then went back to feeding.  The bull answered my call out of sight.  I slowly moved closer, making sure not to spook the cows.  Another bull began bugling on the far ridge.  The herd bull made a roaring bugle and began working his way up the ridge. The cows stayed in the bottom of the draw where I could see them.  The herd bull was now 150 yards up the ridge and raking a tree.  I made the decision I would move up to the edge of the clearing. The cows became uneasy and began moving down the draw.  I knew I was in a good spot.  The bull had lost control of his herd.  I made a few cow mews. The herd bull answered my call.  I watched as the large 6x6 bull laid his head back and ran down the open hillside.  At 40 yards the bull stopped behind a single tree. I made a few cow mews hoping to coax the bull down the hill.  The bull turned and walked into the opening, giving me a broadside shot at 55 yards.  As the bull began to bugle I settled my pin on his chest and released the arrow from my 67# Mathews Monster bow.  I could see the arrow strike the bull behind his front shoulder.  The bull ran 40 yards up the hill and piled up right in front of me.  I walked up to the big 6x6 bull amazed by the size of his antlers.  With a 47” spread and 50” main beams this bull was truly a trophy.
