Each year I return to those special hunting areas where I’ve been successful at calling in bull elk. These hunting areas have similar geographical characteristics such as Northern exposures with dark timber, flat spots, water and open clearings.  I have often found that if you shoot a bull in an area, there will be another bull to take his place the next year.  The cow elk in these areas will most likely use the same general location.

The more of these areas you have to choose from the better your chances will be on locating a bull that will answer your call.  I don’t like to rely on hunting the same areas each season.  I believe my success has been partly due to the fact that I’m always searching for new hunting areas.  Each year I hunt my favorite spots.  If I have no success, I try a new area.  This has allowed me to expand my knowledge of the whole region and gives me plenty of options on places to hunt from season to season.  

My 2010 elk hunt took place in Idaho. It was the middle of September and I’d been hunting hard for a week with my son, Chad. This was a new hunting area so we spent several days glassing and calling for elk.  After checking several areas in the unit we decided to concentrate on a few drainages where we’d located several bulls.  On the 19th of September we entered the area. The plan was simple, Chad would hunt the drainage to the South and I would focus on hunting the area to the North.  After an hour hike I reached a lookout point where I could glass a few different pockets of timber.  It wasn’t long and I spotted a cow elk feeding in the shadows.  A few minutes later a spine-tingling bugle echoed the canyon and a bull appeared.  I watched the large 6x6 bull for several minutes.  As the sun began to set on the horizon and the wind thermals became consistent I decided to make my move toward the bull.  Not wasting any time, I grabbed my gear and took off.  I headed down the ridge and crossed the creek.  I checked the wind with my Wind Drifter powdered wind detector.  The wind was perfect.  I was now within 200 yards of the pocket of timber where I had seen the bull.  I bugled with my X-Series Herd Bull Reed.  The bull quickly answered my call.  I began moving toward the bull.  The bull bugled on his own, so I just kept closing the distance.  I set up under him and gave a single cow mew. The bull ripped off a loud bugle.  I let out another single cow mew and moved up 20 more yards.  The bull bugled again.  I could see the tops of his antlers 60 yards above me as he crested the sage brush ridge.  Not making a sound I watched as the bull came down the ridge.  I didn’t have a shot through the brush, so I waited patiently as the bull glared down the hill at only 25 yards. After 30 seconds, the bull turned to walk back up the hill to his cows.  At 45 yards he entered a clearing.  I drew my bow and cow mewed to stop the bull.  I shot the arrow and watched as the fletch disappeared behind his front shoulder.  As the bull ran over the hill I bugled twice and listened carefully.  I could hear a large crashing sound.  I walked up the hill to where the bull was standing when I made the shot. After a short blood trail I found the expired bull laying in the sage brush.  I smiled ear to ear, I had succeeded in my goal of calling in and arrowing a mature bull.
