As the warm days of August come to a close, bachelor groups of bulls begin preparing for the rut by rubbing the velvet from their antlers, being careful not to damage them. The bulls remove the tattered velvet and polish their antlers by rubbing them on smaller diameter trees, shrubs and even the ground.  This is the first evidence of the rut and I call this stage 1.  Once you’ve located an area like this, mark it on your GPS or a map with the date you found it.  During the first stage of the rut, bulls will begin sparring and establishing a pecking order.  The mature bulls will move in amongst groups of cows and calves. These groups, called harems, are the scene of constant action from September through October.

Stage 2 of the rut is the most obvious and is my favorite time to hunt.  When the rut begins the bulls will begin bugling.  I’ve found that as the rut progresses, so does the diameter of trees being rubbed.  If you hike into an area and find a lot of larger diameter trees that have been rubbed, these are excellent spots to hunt. By inspecting the ground under the raked trees for tracks, you may be able to tell how large the bull is.  A mature bull will have a track of 4 1/2 inches in length or longer. During the second stage of the rut bulls become more vocal and this will be a hunters best chance to call a bull into close range.  The herd bulls will aggressively guard their harem from other bulls. The majority of cows will be bred during this stage. When the cows come into estrus ("heat"), the mating begins. A bull elk must be ready -- a cow is receptive for mating less than 24 hours. She won't be willing to mate again until her second estrus cycle arrives in 20 days.

Stage 3 of the rut occurs during the middle of October.  This is the tail end of the rut. Harems disband when the rut ends. Cows regroup, and bulls of all ages may gather in bachelor groups.

Regardless of what stage of the rut the elk are in, your best chances of finding elk is to search in the cool, dark pockets of timber on North facing slopes.  In extremely dry years, elk congregate around water.  If the bulls are not vocal, these herds can be difficult to locate.  A hunter must identify fresh sign to help put him in the vicinity of an active elk herd.
